[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
We are coming to you live
from Boulder, Colorado,
from the Gaiam Studios here.
And this is a live
show, so I encourage
you to interact with us
on Facebook and Twitter.
I'll be asking your questions
throughout the show,
so keep the comments coming in.
So did you know that your
thoughts control your genes?
Now, I don't mean the
jeans you're wearing.
I mean the genes inside
your body, your DNA.
This could be one of the biggest
breakthroughs in science today,
learning how to turn on and
off the genetic activity
of your cells with the
power of your thoughts
and your perceptions.
Joining me today, to help
us explore this concept,
is cellular biologist
Dr. Bruce Lipton.
Dr. Lipton is an
internationally-recognized
leader in the field
of epigenetics,
which is what we're
talking about today.
His groundbreaking
discoveries in the field
of the new biology
and epigenetics
are the foundation
for human evolution.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for joining us today.
>>BRUCE L. LIPTON: Lisa,
thank you so very much.
It's a great opportunity to
talk about an exciting evolution
in our planet.
And it's all new science.
>>LISA: It has to do,
really, with human evolution.
You link the science and
biology to human evolution,
which is not an easy task.
>>LIPTON: Well, it's so
profoundly important.
Because up at this
point in time,
we really bought into
the belief that we're
more or less victims
of our heredity--
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: --that we
didn't pick the genes,
and we can't change the genes.
And yet, these genes
control our characteristics.
And it turns out, the
new science reveals
this is a completely
false assumption
and that we are so profoundly
powerful, because not only do
we select and
activate our genes,
but we can modify our
gene expression just
by the way we respond to
life and perceive the world.
>>LISA: So in understanding
the new biology,
let's learn a little bit
about the old biology,
or the existing, I should
say, biology, science.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
OK.
Well, I mean,
basically, we've all
been programmed with the belief
that this DNA-- the story
of DNA and the whole
history of DNA--
is a molecule that has the
blueprints for our lives built
into it and that
we receive this DNA
at the moment of conception.
And the rest of our
life is really just
an unfolding of the DNA.
So in one sense, your
life is essentially
preprogrammed in that belief
at the moment of conception.
The rest of it is just
unfolding the genes.
That belief, of
course, has led us
into believing that we are
powerless in controlling
our own health.
>>LISA: That we are subject
to our genetic upbringing
or our genetic code--
>>LIPTON: Yes.
>>LISA: And that we have
to express that, right?
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
And then, when we find, oh,
my goodness, maybe our genes
aren't operating correctly,
then all of a sudden,
we go outside of
ourselves and say,
I'm not powerful enough
to take care of my health.
I really have to seek
a rescuer, someone
who is going to guide me, help
me, and bring my health in,
because I can't
manage my own health.
And that's the belief system
we've been brought up with.
But it's a totally
incorrect assumption.
And that's why I get so
excited about talking
about this new biology.
>>LISA: OK.
So let's learn a little bit
about the function of the cell.
We're going to empower
ourselves right now
to learn what's going
on inside our own body.
>>LIPTON: OK.
Well, let's first
understand this.
When we look in a mirror and
see ourselves in the mirror,
and we see a single
individual looking back-- you
look in the mirror, and there's
that beautiful Lisa looking
back at yourself--
we see ourselves
as single individuals.
That is a total misperception.
Because in truth,
we are actually
made out of about
50 trillion cells.
The cells are the living entity.
A human, by full definition,
is a community of cells.
So when I say, Bruce, I'm really
speaking for 50 trillion cells.
So now you say, well, what about
these cells inside your body?
And I go, well,
interestingly enough,
if you look at the
average cell in your body,
you're going to find a
very interesting fact,
and that is this.
Now, we look at a
human and I say, well--
in a textbook of human
biology, I say, look
at all the human systems--
digestive, respiratory,
excretory system, nervous
system, reproductive system, et
cetera, even immune
system-- and I say,
what's interesting is that
virtually every single cell
in our body has every one
of these systems in it.
In other words,
whatever we can do,
we can only do it because
cells are doing it, OK?
Relevance, by definition, a cell
is a miniature human and that,
in our body-- our body is a
community of 50 trillion cells.
Our mind is more or
less a government.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: If our government
is working in harmony
with the system, then
the 50 trillion cells
work together and create health
and happiness in your body.
If your government-- meaning
your mind, your thoughts,
and beliefs-- are not in harmony
with life or out of phase
or out of sync with what's
going on in the world, then,
by definition, it alters
and fractures the community,
and we express disease
and ill health.
So basically, health is
harmony in the system,
and disease is when the
community begins to break down.
We've had a tendency in our
history, blame the cells.
And it turns out,
oh, my goodness, no.
It's sort of
recognizing-- We have
to recognize our
responsibility in our thoughts
is because the new
science reveals
that our thoughts
actually control
our genetics and our biology.
>>LISA: You're basically
just describing
our entire political
environment,
our entire environmental
crisis that we're
going on with right now, right?
Exactly what you said, the
microcosm versus the macrocosm.
>>LIPTON: It's not even
versus the macrocosm.
It's a microcosm and the
macrocosm are the same picture.
And that's because there
is an understanding
that our world, nature,
is built on something
called fractal geometry.
And you say, oh, well,
what the heck is that?
And I say, well, it's
a mathematics that
implies the existence
of as above, so below.
That is built in
to the mathematics.
The significance is--
That's why I say, if you see
cells as miniature humans,
and you see how they work, well,
the information about how they
work and how they communicate
applies to us as humans,
because we're just a
cell made by cells.
>>LISA: Well, let's
take a look at this.
Let's see what the cell looks
like and the functions of it.
>>LIPTON: OK.
Well, interestingly enough,
we talk about single cells.
And we talk about
cells as, like,
the amoebas and stuff like that.
And I say, well, what
does a cell have?
Well, it has all the functions.
I say, but what
creates the cell?
And what creates a cell is
things called proteins--
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: --OK?
And proteins are
the building blocks.
So if you want to build a
house, and you go to Home Depot,
and you've got all these
parts, and you collect
all these parts, you
can build a house,
and you build many
different versions.
Proteins are similar to that.
They are the building blocks
that create the cell, OK?
So basically, then,
your physical structure
is determined by
your proteins, OK?
And the proteins are
created from blueprints.
So the blueprints
are called the DNA.
>>LISA: OK.
That's the genetic code.
>>LIPTON: That's
the genetic code,
and it gives us these proteins.
Now, what's really interesting
about the proteins is
that proteins-- each of about
the 150,000 different proteins
that make up a
human-- each protein
has its own unique shape and
its own unique structure.
So as you assemble them, you get
all of the different variations
of life from these proteins, OK?
But now comes, what's
the secret of life?
And the secret of
life is that proteins
are capable of changing
their shape, OK?
So while we have 150,000
different proteins,
each with their own
shape, it turns out
that when this protein responds
to environmental information,
environmental signals, what's
going on in the environment.
Specific environmental
signals can
alter the shape of a protein.
So what we talk
about is, A, there
are proteins that
make up the body,
and, B, there are signals that
come from the environment.
When a signal
complements a protein,
it causes the protein
to change shape.
Well, ah, that's
the secret of life.
>>LISA: And that's what
we're taking a look at here
as it's happening?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, you're actually
watching proteins responding
and changing from shape
A to shape B in response
to environmental signals.
>>LISA: And how is this
the secret of life?
>>LIPTON: Well, the
secret of life is this.
If proteins don't move,
then you are essentially
a physical body, a
cadaver more or less.
Why?
A body, a cadaver, a dead
body's got all the proteins,
got all the structure,
but there's no life.
I say, but where
does life come from?
Well, the fundamental
definition of life is movement.
I say, yeah, but where
does movement come from?
And then I go, proteins change
their shape, which is movement.
And what the cells do
is use the movement
and harness the movement
to carry out the functions.
Respiration, digestion, muscle
contraction, for example,
is changing the
shape of the protein.
So where does life come from?
Signals engaging with the
proteins changing the shape,
and then the shape movement
is used to do work.
>>LISA: So it's our
responses to the environment.
>>LIPTON: To the environment.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Right.
If you cut off the response
to the environment,
so the cell doesn't
respond to the environment,
the proteins stop moving.
A cell that cannot respond to
the environment is almost like
a person that's comatose.
They're still alive,
but there's no behavior.
>>LISA: So as our cells are
operating and replicating
and replicating, the
environmental senses
that come in with thoughts
or foods or other type
of environmental factors
are what shape our cells?
>>LIPTON: Well, yeah, actually,
it's the environmental factors.
And again, as you
mentioned, it's
a whole list of
environmental factors.
There are physical factors,
such as the nutrition
that we're eating.
But there are also energetic
factors, such as consciousness
or what's going on in the
field-- electromagnetic fields.
Like cell phones are creating
electromagnetic fields,
which interact with
our proteins and can
influence our own biology.
So we're starting to see
that we are responding
to a whole network
of information
from the environment,
which includes
both physical and
energetic components.
Now, you then have
to say, well, how
does the cell organize
this behavior?
Because without
organization, it would just
be a bunch of stuff
moving around.
But it's all coordinated.
>>LISA: Hm.
>>LIPTON: Well, there's
the equivalent of a brain.
And the equivalent of the
brain is the cell membrane.
And it's the cell's skin.
And it's very interesting,
because what I've talked about
in relating a cell to a human is
that cells are, by definition,
miniature humans.
And the characteristic
and structure of the cells
relate to our own.
Where we have
organs in our body,
the cell has miniature
organs called organelles, OK?
And it's interesting,
because the membrane, or skin
of the cell, is the
equivalent of the brain.
We used to think it was
the nucleus with the genes,
because we'd say, oh,
genes control this,
and genes control that.
But genes are blueprints.
And this is what we
really have to get
people to fully understand.
A blueprint has no
self-actualization.
It's just a piece
of information.
>>LISA: A flat blueprint.
>>LIPTON: That's it.
>>LISA: Yes.
OK.
>>LIPTON: And so, you say,
well, a gene turned on
and a gene turned off.
And I say, do blueprints
turn on and turn off?
And the answer is no,
they don't do that.
They're just information.
>>LISA: Not without
something to construct it.
>>LIPTON: That's right.
So to make a
construction, you have
blueprints, which are plans.
But you have a contractor--
>>LISA: Ah.
>>LIPTON: --who selects the
blueprints and organizes how
they interact and build the
structure from the blueprints,
OK?
>>LISA: So we are the
contractors of our cells?
>>LIPTON: Well, what it turns
out is the nervous system--
>>LISA: Ah.
>>LIPTON: --is the contractor.
And how does it work?
It reads those
environmental signals
that are around us,
translates the signals
into biological information
which goes to the cells,
and then that information
controls the behavior.
So in our model of
the cell, for example,
if I add some new
chemistry, like hormones,
to a culture dish, the chemistry
sort of rains on the cells.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And then
some of the hormones
stick to the cell's
surface, the skin.
And the skin, the membrane,
reads this information
through what are
called receptors.
And I go, again, well,
it's just like a human.
Our skin is actually the
source of our nervous system.
And this is what we
know from embryology.
>>LISA: It's a giant membrane.
>>LIPTON: It's a
giant membrane, and it
has receptors--
eyes, ears, nose--
and we read the environmental
signals through these receptors
and then respond to these
signals with our behavior.
The cell, a miniature
version of that,
has receptors built
into the membrane
to read the
environmental signals.
And when the signals show
up at the cell membrane,
the cell membrane, just
like the nervous system,
distributes the signals
throughout the body
of the cell.
And these signals, like I showed
in the last slide, when signals
are sent into the
cell, the proteins
and their complementary signals,
when they come together,
cause the proteins to move.
The movement generates
respiration, or digestion,
or any of the
functions of the cell.
>>LISA: Or replication.
>>LIPTON: Ah, that's the
important part, replication.
And it goes like this.
Oh, the signals
affect the proteins.
But then, you
might say, but what
if I need a protein to
respond to a signal,
but I don't have that
protein in the cell?
Well, that's the
next exciting part.
So he says, well, where
do you get the protein
to make a response
to the environment?
And the answer is, the
DNA are the blueprints.
So the cell membrane sends
a signal in to the cell,
to the nucleus,
and then activates
expression of the gene.
Well, why is that so relevant?
And the answer is very simple.
Is that the environmental signal
is what engages and activates
the gene, not the gene
activating itself.
Well, this is a whole
new field of science.
So just to let
people know, we're
moving beyond genetics
as a field of science.
And the new field of science
is called signal transduction.
It's a complicated name.
But what it says
is, can we follow
how a signal from the
environment enters a cell
and then engages a function?
And that's signal transduction.
>>LISA: So now this
could explain disease.
And one of the Facebook
questions coming in
is, how do you explain disease?
So you have this gene,
you have this cell,
that may have the cancer gene.
And it could lay dormant
for years and years
and forever maybe.
>>LIPTON: Right.
>>LISA: But then the outside
environmental signal that comes
in could be stress, toxins,
food, negative thinking--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --activates the gene?
>>LIPTON: That's what
activates the gene.
That's why when you
say, well, somebody
says I have a cancer
gene, I say, now, wait.
If you had a cancer gene,
then you should have a cancer.
And then I go, but when
we look at the statistics,
everybody that has
so-called cancer genes
doesn't have cancer.
So then you have to ask the very
more important question about,
well, how can I be-- you
know, possess a cancer gene
and not have a cancer?
And the answer is, because the
gene doesn't activate itself.
And that's why, let's
say, a doctor would say,
well, you have this
particular gene,
and you have a propensity.
67% of the people
will express a cancer.
And then I go, well,
that's interesting.
But I really want to know, the
33% that have this same gene
and don't have the cancer,
that's more important.
Because it's what is
different in their life,
because they have a
gene, but they're not
effecting a disease with it.
And it turns out is it's not
the possession of the gene.
It's the response to
the environment that
will send signals
to engage the gene.
>>LISA: And so if you
have stress coming
into the environment, it
creates a cascading effects
of chemicals--
>>LIPTON: Yes.
>>LISA: --that then activate
the cancer and the gene.
Of course, then it replicates
into cancer, right?
>>LIPTON: Right.
And this cascade of chemistry,
that goes from the environment
to the gene, part of it
is signal transduction.
But there is a
special part, where
the signal leaves the
cytoplasm of the cell
but goes into the nucleus
where the genes are and affects
a heredity.
That's a new science
called epigenetics.
And this is the
revolution in science.
Because basically, it says this.
What did we all learn in
school, and what did I
teach early on in
medical school?
It was something
called genetic control.
It simply means
control by genes.
The new science with
signal transduction
is called epigenetic control.
And you say, well,
what does that mean?
And I say, that
little epi, E-P-I--
>>LISA: Uh, huh?
>>LIPTON: --it
really means above.
So if I say genetic control,
controlled by genes,
and I say epigenetic control,
it says control above the genes,
and now we're beginning to
recognize what really controls
the genes is not the
genes, but the signals
from the environment
control the gene.
>>LISA: Now, when you were
teaching medical school--
>>LIPTON: Yes?
>>LISA: --and you were teaching
basically the old science,
according to you, were you
able to infuse these teachings
into what you were talking
about in your professor days?
>>LIPTON: Well, it
was interesting.
Because when I started
out in my professor days,
I was a conventional
biologist, OK?
But my research
was on stem cells.
And this was,
like, 45 years ago.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>LIPTON: So at that time,
there were just a handful of us
in the entire world
that even knew
what a stem cell was really.
And a stem cell
is the equivalent
of an embryonic cell,
and it's in our bodies.
And all of us have stem cells.
And the reason is simply this.
Every day we lose
hundreds of billions
of cells due to wear and tear
and normal aging processes,
and that becomes important.
It says, well, if you're
losing hundreds of billions
of cells every day, how long
would it be before you're dead?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>LIPTON: And the
answer's, well, no.
Because we replace them.
And then I say,
well, then what's
replacing all of these
cells that are dying?
And the answer is
these embryonic stem
cells are providing
for all the new cells.
So all of us have stem
cells if we're alive.
>>LISA: Uh, huh.
>>LIPTON: Because otherwise,
we wouldn't be alive.
That's a good start.
>>LISA: We have a
certain amount, right?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, OK?
And the significance
is, so what is
it that controls
these stem cells?
So I'm teaching medical students
the conventional curriculum.
Yes, genes control
the fate of the cells.
And at the same time, I
am cloning stem cells.
And what does that really mean?
Well, cloning stem cells means
I take one isolated stem cell
and put it into a culture
dish all by itself.
And every 10 to 12
hours, a cell divides.
So I put in one cell.
Then there's two.
Then's their four, eight.
And it doubles and doubles.
And after a week
or two, I've got
thousands of cells
in the petri dish.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Well, that's
not the experiment.
That's just getting ready.
But what that means
is, what do I have?
I have thousands of
genetically identical cells,
because they came
from one parent.
Every cell is just a
clone of the parent.
So I have thousands of
genetically identical cells.
Now I do the experiment.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: I take some of the
cells out of my culture dish
and put it into
another culture dish,
and I change the environment.
>>LISA: OK.
What do you change?
>>LIPTON: Well, the environment
is the culture medium.
And you have to recognize,
cells are like fish.
They live in fluid.
And so if you have
fish in an aquarium,
you have to provide them with
food and the right pH and all
these things.
>>LISA: --pH in the environment.
I see.
>>LIPTON: So I adjust my culture
medium to feed the cells.
And what I do is I
make some minor changes
in the chemistry of that.
And when I take some
cells out of my main dish,
put them in this new dish--
let's call it environment A--
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: The cells form muscle.
>>LIPTON: But here's
the experiment.
I go back to the original dish,
with the original stem cells,
take some more out but
put them in petri dish
B with a different
environment, environment B.
And in this dish,
they form bone.
And I go back, go get some more
cells out of the original dish,
put it in dish C with a
different environment, C,
and they form fat cells.
And then you're left with
a very simple question.
What controls the
fate of the cells?
Well, the first thing is this.
They're all
genetically identical.
So it wasn't the genes that made
the difference between bone,
muscle, and fat.
It was the environment.
And what was interesting, here
I am teaching students genes
control life, and the
cells are teaching me.
No, the cells learn,
that they respond
to the environmental information
and adjust their genes
to match the environment, OK?
>>LISA: So the individual
cells in there,
although they came from
the same host, changed
based on the environment.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
They were all genetically
identical, too.
So you can't say, oh,
genes made me become this,
or genes made me
become that, OK?
>>LISA: So it's the outside
environment that changes it.
But there's an
interesting question
coming in from Facebook.
>>LIPTON: Yeah?
>>LISA: James says, how do you
explain that beliefs can change
certain parts of DNA, but
others it can't change,
such as height, eye color,
those types of things?
>>LIPTON: Well, that may
not be necessarily true.
For example, we know that
in multiple personalities,
that in personality A, a
person can have blue eyes,
and in personality B,
they can have grey eyes--
>>LISA: Seriously?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, seriously.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>LIPTON: --and many
different changes.
So for example,
in personality A,
a person may have an allergic
response to strawberries
and then switch
to personality B,
and a minute later, they
could eat strawberries
without any problem at all.
>>LISA: So you could
effectively, with your mind,
control allergies?
>>LIPTON: Yes.
Most allergies are
actually really associated
with a mind aspect, as well.
But there's a
developmental part that we
can't get into right now.
>>LISA: Right now,
right, but yes.
>>LIPTON: But it's interesting.
There's an old story, like,
of a couple going out.
And the guy is in
love with this woman.
And she has a dog.
And that's part of
the relationship.
And then they have a breakup.
And after the breakup,
the guy, all of a sudden,
has an allergy to dogs.
He never had an allergy to dogs.
>>LISA: I see.
>>LIPTON: It's a
psychological consequence
of connecting the dog with
the relationship and the break
of that relationship.
And the pathology of the
allergy is a reflection
of the breaking of
that relationship.
>>LISA: So that's
just another example
of how the environment
affects the cells.
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
And one of the
things I really like
to get people to understand is,
I have a plastic dish of cells.
I put these cells in
a good environment,
and they grow, and they
flourish, and they're healthy,
and it's really great.
And then I say, look,
just take the dish
from the good environment
and move it over here
to a bad environment.
And immediately, what happens
is the cells start to get sick,
and they begin to die.
Now, if I had a
specialist doctor
who was a cell doctor in our
conventional world of health,
he would look at my cells
in the sick culture.
And he goes, oh, my
god, Bruce, your cells
need some medicine, some drugs.
And then I would
go, absolutely not.
And the reason why is this.
To bring health back to the
cells, I don't give them drugs.
All I do is take them
from the bad environment,
move them right back to
the good environment.
They will instantaneously
recover and become healthy
again.
The simple point is, since
the environment is influencing
the genetic activity, a
healthy environment elicits
a healthy response,
and an environment
that's not in harmony
with our biology
will elicit a
pathological response.
>>LISA: Well, so then why
do they give chemotherapy
to people who have cancer
with the cell replicating
in its dysfunctional
state and dying?
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: What is the
purpose of that?
>>LIPTON: Well, the
old belief system
is, these cells are rogue cells.
Their genes went crazy.
And so we blame the genes.
We blame the cells.
And we say, kill the cells.
And it's really a
very terrible thing,
if you think about
it in this regard.
And that is this.
Chemotherapy kills
cells that are dividing.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: Well, you live
every day because you
have stem cells that
have to divide to replace
the hundreds of billions of
cells you lose every day.
When you give a
patient chemotherapy,
does the chemotherapy
distinguish
between the necessary healthy
stem cells and the rogue cancer
cells?
And the answer is no.
And so when you are
doing chemotherapy,
not only are you killing
the cancer cells, which
was the intention,
but you are also
debilitating the
individual, because you're
killing their own
stem cells, which
they need for their health.
So chemotherapy is not the
best approach to kill those.
>>LISA: Well, could you do it in
addition to what you're talking
about in terms of changing the
environment with your thoughts,
with your mental
health, with your food,
with different types of--
>>LIPTON: This is
what we're finding.
Here's a great story.
Dean Ornish, a
wonderful physician,
who has done a lot of research,
recently published a paper
where he took prostate
cancer patients.
And he took a group of them.
And he said, look, for 90 days,
no drugs, no chemotherapy,
and none of this
stuff like this.
What are we going
to do for 90 days?
We're going to change your diet.
We're going to give you
stress reduction techniques.
We're going to teach
you how to meditate,
and gave them just
some lifestyle
changes like that, right?
The significance was in
90 days, 500 genes changed
their function and their action.
And many of those
genes were related
to the development of
the prostate cancer.
What it had shown was, you
didn't have to give them drugs.
You just had to return them to
a more harmonious environment,
an environment that's
very supportive
of their natural life state.
And the genes automatically
reverted back.
>>LISA: So when your
doctor tells you to get rid
of the stress in your life,
he's really trying to tell you,
this is the way of
healing essentially.
>>LIPTON: Well, absolutely.
Because the American
Psychological Association
has now revealed that up
to 90% of doctor visits
are due to stress.
And it's the stress
that interferes with us.
A lot of people think, well,
my genes are causing my issues.
And it goes, well, you
know, let's correct
a very important point here.
And that is this.
Less than 5% of the
people on this planet
arrived here with
genetic defects
that would impact a negative
thing on their life, OK?
Less than 5%.
>>LISA: Really?
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: So that means
95% of the people
don't have to necessarily
express their genetic makeup?
>>LIPTON: Well, no.
They express their
genetic makeup,
but it's not pathological.
>>LISA: But it's not.
OK.
>>LIPTON: 95% of us got here
with a completely wonderful set
of genes to have a
healthy, happy existence.
And then you say, well,
I can understand the 5%,
and we can talk about
them, because they still
can be influenced
in a different way.
But the 95% of the
people that start
getting illness, and they
were the ones that got here
with a healthy set of
genes, how can we start off
by blaming the genes
as the problem?
And now what we know is, not
only does the environment
select the genes, through the
signals from the environment,
but the environmental
signals can
modify the reading of the gene.
Now, here's a number that
is, like, mind-boggling.
A gene is a blueprint
to make a protein, which
is a building block of the body.
>>LISA: Uh, huh.
>>LIPTON: Depending on how you
respond to the environment,
you can create
thousands of variations
of proteins from the
same gene blueprint
just by the way you
respond to the environment.
And out of those
thousands, some of them
might be good interpretations
of the gene blueprint,
and some of them might be
pathological interpretations.
So when we talked about
cancer, 90% of cancer
is not based on heredity.
90% of cancer is based on
having normal genes that,
through environmental
interactions that are not
in harmony, are then reading
as a pathological gene.
It's not the gene that
caused the problem.
>>LISA: And it's
also our perception
of that particular event.
You could have
stress in your life.
But your perception
of the stress
affects the environment
of the gene.
>>LIPTON: Of the genes, yeah.
>>LISA: We're going
to take a quick break.
But I want to come back
to that, because that's
a huge teaching within itself.
Dr. Bruce Lipton is my
guest, cellular biologist.
We're going to come back and
talk about why all of this
is important, and incredibly
important to the survival
of our species.
We'll be right back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr, and my guest is
cellular biologist Dr. Bruce
Lipton.
And we're talking about how the
environment affects our cells.
And now this is a
great conversation
when it has to do
with a petri dish.
But how does this have to
do with us as human beings?
>>LIPTON: OK.
Well, what we were
talking about is
when you take a
petri dish of cells
and move it from
a good environment
to a bad environment, they
get sick, and put them back,
they get healthy.
And what we really
have to also mention
is what we discussed earlier.
A human is a community
of 50 trillion cells.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: So in
simple truth, a human
is a skin-covered petri dish.
And we have culture medium
that's called blood.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And why
is this relevant?
Because it doesn't make a
difference whether the cell
is in a plastic
dish or a skin dish.
It responds to the composition
of the culture medium
to determine its fate.
So I say, well, oh, OK.
Well, what does that mean now
in my skin-covered petri dish?
And I say, well, the blood
is the culture medium that
affects the behavior
in genetics.
And I go, yeah, but what
controls the chemistry?
Because when I
change the chemistry
of the medium in the petri dish,
I change the fate of the cells.
I go, ah, the brain.
And while I call myself a
cell biologist, all of us
are, in truth, really what we
would call self biologists.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Because all of us
are creating our own biology.
And I say, well,
how do you do that?
And I say, when we perceive
something in the world,
our mind makes an
interpretation.
And when it makes
an interpretation,
it sends chemistry of that
interpretation into the body,
through the blood, and
that's the culture medium
that controls the
fate of the cell.
So basically, I say, look.
Let's say you open up your eyes,
and you see someone you love,
OK?
When you see someone
you love, then
the brain releases some
wonderful chemistry
into the blood, such
as oxytocin, dopamine,
vasopressin, for example.
If I take those
chemicals, actually,
that are released
by the brain in love
and put it in a culture
dish, a plastic dish,
those cells grow beautifully.
But it's also the same reason
why when you are in love
and you're releasing those
chemistry in your blood,
and that blood is the culture
medium of your 50 trillion
cells, that's why you feel so
healthy when you're in love
and so vibrant and alive.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>LIPTON: And I
say, yeah, but look.
Same brain, but
you open your eyes,
and you see something
that scares you.
Ah, well, in a
state of fear, you
don't release the love
chemicals from the brain.
You start to release
other kinds of chemicals,
like stress hormones,
cortisol, or histamine,
or what we call cytokines.
These kinds of chemicals,
released into the blood,
prepare the cells
for fight or flight.
Get ready to protect yourself.
Well, the interesting
thing about that
is, if I take those
chemicals and put them
into a plastic petri dish with
cells, my cells stop growing.
>>LISA: Well, doesn't it
suppress the immune system
and all of those
other functions?
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
And the reason for
that is very simple.
Because if you're going to
be running away from a lion--
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: --you want
every bit of energy
you can muster up to
get away from the lion.
So if you're saying, oh, yeah,
well, I have an immune system,
and I'm fighting a
bacterial infection,
it's sort of like, who needs to
fight the bacterial infection?
You're being chased by a lion.
So when you're under
stress, you actually--
the chemistry that's
released shuts down
the growth and
maintenance of the cells,
shuts down the immune
system, to do what?
Take that energy and conserve
it for running away and saving
your life.
When you get out of stress,
then the normal chemistry
comes back.
>>LISA: And the cell
goes back towards growth.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
Well, in history, you
got chased by a lion.
If you got away, then
the lion's not there,
and you go back into growth.
So stress was only used
in normal evolution
as just to run away
from that emergency.
And then you look
at the world we
live in today, 24/7, 365 stress.
>>LISA: Stress.
>>LIPTON: That means
every day, we're
releasing these hormones
into our body-- which
are what-- diverting our
growth and repressing
our immune system to
get us ready to run.
So we're always on a get
set, get ready to go.
But this cannot be sustained.
It was only meant to be used
to run away from that lion
but not as a way of life.
So when you look
at the population,
you realize, well,
look at all the stress.
The kids are under stress.
The parents are under stress.
The communities
are under stress.
And what does that mean?
>>LISA: We're in
a constant state
of suppressed immune systems.
>>LIPTON: Suppressing
the immune system.
The more stress you're
under, the sicker you get.
And that's why the data comes
out, 90% of office visits
are due to stress.
>>LISA: What does this look
like in terms of the DNA?
How does this show up?
>>LIPTON: Well, what happens
is the DNA is a blueprint.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And what's
really neat about this--
because we always thought,
well, the blueprint, that's
what you have, that's your
gene, that's what you have--
but the new science of
epigenetics reveals, no, no.
Like a contractor, you
can give me a blueprint,
and I can look at
it and say, oh, no,
I need to make a
change here, and I
need to make a change here
to make it more adaptable.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: Epigenetics
is adaptability.
And so it says,
I can take a gene
and modify the
readout of the gene
to create thousands of
different versions of proteins
from the same blueprint that
make the protein that best
fits or adapts me.
Well, if I live in a
stressful environment,
the proteins I'm
going to make are not
for my health and harmony.
They're going to be
for my protection.
That's different than growth,
because protection and growth
aren't one and the same.
So basically, it
really tells us that we
have to recognize that
stress is diverting
our genetics from health
into something else.
>>LISA: Well, there's
a great question
coming in from Facebook, a
listener by the name of Kelly.
And she said she was
diagnosed with MS. Now,
what does she do with
this information?
>>LIPTON: OK.
Now look, we're not doing
doctor diagnosis here.
So we're getting basic
science overview, OK?
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
But when you get
a label like that.
>>LIPTON: OK, here's
a basic understanding.
MS, by definition, is
called autoimmune disease.
And you say, oh, that
sounds very medical,
but what does it mean?
You translate
autoimmune disease,
and it means self-destruction.
And what it means is, it
is your response to life
that is ultimately
sabotaging your biology,
because your perceptions are
releasing chemistry that is not
supporting health
but, in fact, creating
a complement of
what you perceive.
Now, why is this relevant?
Because in multiple sclerosis
cases, it finds out,
well, doctors tell a patient,
oh, this is your fate.
This is your diagnosis.
>>LISA: This is your label, yes.
>>LIPTON: That's a belief.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: And when
you take that belief
and put it in the system, you
manifest what the belief is,
OK?
But it turns out, there
many patients with MS
that say, I'm not
buying that story.
I'm going to go out
and change my life,
and I'm going to change
my belief system,
and I'm going to
change the way I live.
And many of them have
made full recoveries, even
from the point where they
were in a wheelchair to later
being free again.
And the whole idea was what?
The MS is just a reflection
of self-destruction, chemistry
that is not supporting yourself.
>>LISA: Can you really
do that with the power
of your thoughts, really?
>>LIPTON: Well,
absolutely you can.
And I know so many
people who have.
And that's the exciting part.
And a friend of mine, Gary
Sinclair, was in a wheelchair
and was actually getting
respiratory help.
And it hit him one day
that this is not my life.
And he changed his life.
He is now a
long-distance runner.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Wow.
>>LIPTON: And he has a website,
so, I mean-- Gary Sinclair.
So it basically says,
you can do this.
And is this something novel?
And the answer is no.
Look, we talk about
something called the placebo.
>>LISA: Uh, huh.
>>LIPTON: I say,
what's a placebo?
Well, it's a sugar pill,
but it makes people well.
I say, yeah, but why
does it make people well?
It's like, because
they believe--
>>LISA: They can get well.
>>LIPTON: --the pill is going
to be what's going to help them.
They don't know
it's a sugar pill.
They believe it.
So then they take
this pill, and then
they get well of very
many different things,
from cancer to every other
kind of disease, and they get
and then later find out
the pill didn't do it.
The pill was just a sugar pill.
And so why is that relevant?
And the answer was, the healing
didn't come from the pill.
The healing came from
the belief in the pill.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: Well,
the relevance is,
factually, one third
of all healings
in the medical profession,
drug or surgery-related,
are all due to the
belief of the patient,
not due to the technique or
the chemistry of the drugs.
And while we talk
about placebos--
>>LISA: Really, one third?
>>LIPTON: One third.
That's a given fact of science.
>>LISA: It's a very high number.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
But here is the other part.
Because while we focus
on the positive aspect
of a positive belief
from a placebo pill,
we ignore the other
valuable part.
And that is this.
What about a negative belief?
And it turns out, oh, my god,
there is a science of that.
It's called the nocebo effect.
And what does it show?
A negative belief is equally
powerful in regulating the body
but works in the
opposite direction.
So while a positive belief
can create a placebo healing,
a negative belief
actually can cause someone
to die or create a
disease, because they
have the belief in the disease.
And this is called
the nocebo effect.
Nobody talks about it.
But to me, while the
placebo is important,
it's more important to recognize
your negative thoughts.
Your belief that's not very
positive is equally powerful
but works in the
opposite direction.
>>LISA: So how do
you turn this around?
How do you change this
entire environment around you
to replicate positive--
or replicate healthy cells
I should say.
>>LIPTON: Well,
you have to start
being conscious of
what your thoughts are.
And as psychologists tell
us, 70% of our thoughts
are negative and redundant.
Well, if I have
negative thoughts,
I can give you the
biophysiology of that.
Your negative thoughts
are releasing chemistry
that complement a
negative thought.
Cells become a complement
to the perception.
>>LISA: So is it as simple
as changing our thoughts?
>>LIPTON: Absolutely, it is.
And then people say, oh,
yeah, well that sounds easy,
doesn't it?
>>LISA: Sounds easy.
Yeah, it does.
>>LIPTON: And then
it says, oh, come on.
Can my belief do that?
>>LISA: If that
would be the case,
then we would all
be healthy, yes.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
So let's go back to
something that most people
in the audience have
experienced at one time.
And that is, at one
time, most of us
have fallen head
over heels in love.
And I want people to
understand something.
When they have fallen
head over heels in love--
and I ask this of
audiences, and I
love their responses-- I said,
when you go back to that time
you were head over heels
in love, were you healthy?
And almost everybody, oh, yes,
I was exuberantly healthy.
It was so vital.
I was so great.
I say, did you have energy?
And you know, the joke is,
of course, you probably
made love for days without
stopping for food or sleep,
and you had tremendous energy.
And I go, also, go back to what
I call the honeymoon effect.
And I say, was life so
beautiful that you couldn't
wait for the next
day to have more?
And everyone says,
yes, yes, yes.
And I go, that was
not an accident.
That was a creation.
You did that.
And how did you do that?
And the answer is,
you actually started
operating from what we
call the conscious mind
and not operating from
the subconscious mind.
And this is where the whole
difference of whether we're
going to be healthy
or sick emanates from,
these two different minds.
>>LISA: So we can
create this feeling?
If we did it once,
we can do it again.
Is basically that's
what you're saying?
>>LIPTON: You can do it anytime.
You can make it a way of life.
You have to find out.
How did I create the honeymoon
effect, and how come I lost it?
And the answer is very simple.
There are two minds,
conscious, subconscious.
Conscious mind is
connected to your spirit,
your personal identity.
That's who you are.
The conscious mind
is a creative mind.
It has-- If I asked
you, I say, Lisa,
what do you want
out of your life?
Well, you can create an answer.
That comes from
the conscious mind.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And then I
also tell you this.
A conscious mind doesn't always
stay in the present moment.
The conscious mind--
I could say, Lisa,
what's happening next week?
And then you can
think next week.
You're into the
future, creating.
>>LISA: Uh, huh.
>>LIPTON: I say, what
happened last week?
And your mind
could go backwards.
And I could ask you to solve
a math problem in your head.
Your conscious
mind can disconnect
from our conversation
and go up there.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Point.
The conscious mind is not
always running the show.
The conscious mind's thinking.
Well, the issue is if the
conscious mind's thinking,
it's not paying attention.
The default is the
subconscious habits.
And then I go, ah.
The issue is this, that
the fundamental habits
in the subconscious
mind are not even ours.
They came from the first six
years of our development.
And the brain was
in a state called
theta, which is an EEG state,
which, for children, is
recognized as a
state of imagination.
You know, that's
what we see, children
mixing the real and
the imaginary world.
But more than that,
theta is hypnosis.
What's the relevance?
>>LISA: Ah, it's a
learning state, yes.
>>LIPTON: Six years, you
learn about the world.
By how?
By observing it.
But who do you observe?
Other people, your parents--
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: --your
family and community.
>>LISA: You're
constantly modeling.
>>LIPTON: You're modeling,
as you are downloading
through hypnosis,
their behavior.
So I say, your conscious mind
is you and your creativity
and your wishes and desires.
Your subconscious
mind, the programs
you acquired during
the first six years
by observing your community,
your family, et cetera.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: So relevance?
Science has now revealed
this most amazing fact.
We only operate
our lives about 5%
of the time with our
conscious, creative mind.
That's the one that has
positive thinking, as well, OK?
>>LISA: That's the one that can
create the positive thoughts.
>>LIPTON: That's the
one that creates,
and that's where positive
thinking comes from.
But it only operates
5% of the time.
Why?
Because most of the
time, it's thinking.
And if it's thinking,
it's not paying attention.
So 95% of the time, we
shift to the default,
which is called the
subconscious mind.
>>LISA: So it's constantly
defaulting to the subconscious
programming that we learned
from zero to six years old.
>>LIPTON: Other people.
So the behavior when you're not
paying attention is not yours.
It's your family's behavior,
your culture's behavior.
And what people have
to really recognize
is, subconscious by its nature
means below consciousness.
Relevance?
When you shift into
the subconscious,
it happens below your
level of awareness.
It's automatic.
So as I like to
tell in my lectures,
I say, go back in your past.
You had a friend you
were very close to.
You knew your friend's behavior.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: And you happen to
know your friend's parent.
And you happened to see
that your friend shared
some of the same behavior
as their parents did.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>LIPTON: You know, one day you
casually say to your friend,
hey, you know, Bill,
you're just like your dad.
And then you back
away from Bill.
Because Bill's the first guy.
He goes, like, how can
you compare me to my dad?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>LIPTON: And joke is this.
Everybody else can see that
Bill behaves like his dad.
The only one who
doesn't see it is Bill.
Where'd he get the behavior?
First six years of programming.
Why doesn't he see it?
Because his mind is
thinking, and he's
playing the default program.
All of us are Bill.
All of us do this every day.
And so the issue
is, well, how come
our positive thinking isn't
creating that honeymoon
experience?
And the answer is,
because we're only
using it 5% of the
time in a normal day.
But science revealed
something interesting
about the honeymoon.
It's the one time in your
life where you essentially
operate strictly--
>>LISA: From the conscious mind.
>>LIPTON: --from
the conscious mind.
>>LISA: Thank God.
That's why it's important to
go back to that reference.
>>LIPTON: That
reference, because it
says, you did this once.
What did you do?
You created love, and you
created heaven on Earth.
And yet, why did the
honeymoon go away?
And the answer is, because,
inevitably, life still
gets busy, and you or--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: --your partner's
conscious presence
starts to drift as you
start thinking about,
oh, I got to pay the
rent or fix the car.
>>LISA: The stressors
come in, yes.
>>LIPTON: The stressors come in.
You shift from conscious,
you know, conscious focus--
>>LISA: And you change.
>>LIPTON: --and then the
subconscious kicks in.
Well, the subconscious, when it
kicks in, isn't your behavior.
It's the behavior of
your family or community.
And that's why when you're in
this honeymoon and everything's
so wonderful, and
then one day, you
ask a simple question
of your spouse,
and then you get
this, like, response.
And you say to your
spouse, who are you?
Why?
Because the
subconscious behavior
hadn't played up
until this moment.
>>LISA: Hm.
>>LIPTON: It just begins
playing when the mind goes busy.
And then, all of a sudden,
you see the honeymoon-- which
was just two conscious
minds creatively creating
their wishes and desires,
making heaven on Earth--
starts to fade when the
subconscious programs start
taking more of the percentage,
bringing in behaviors that
are not ours, that they there
are other people's behaviors.
And they are not
necessarily good behaviors.
>>LISA: So staying in the
honeymoon phase requires
us to constantly create
that willfully in a place,
disregarding the
stressors that come in,
and staying in, I guess, a state
of present tense, as you say,
mindfulness.
>>LIPTON: Mindfulness.
And this is the whole practice
of, like, Buddhist meditations.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: It's
the idea of, look,
if you stay in control with
your conscious mind, then
every decision you make is your
decision, based on your wishes
and desires.
The moment your conscious mind
starts thinking and leaves
control to the subconscious,
well, every decision
then is based on
the program that you
got from other people,
which is not necessarily
what you wanted in your life.
>>LISA: This is a
great question that's
coming in from one of
our Facebook people.
And we lit up a lot of
the parents out there.
So Casey is saying that she
has a four-year-old daughter.
And how can she keep
her safe but not
instill beliefs-- like,
don't climb that tree,
you're going to fall, or don't
take candy from strangers,
things like that-- how
do you ride that fence?
>>LIPTON: Well,
basically, a child
will pattern
themselves after you.
And it's unfortunate,
because that's
where the problems come from.
Because when you look at
ourselves, we say, yeah, well,
this is who I want to be.
But then, unknowingly,
I'm playing
95% of somebody else's program.
>>LISA: Yeah, do what
I say, not what I do.
>>LIPTON: So a
child is picking up
all of the things
that you're not
watching and still
recording them.
And that's why behaviors
are passed from generation
to generation.
Why?
They are recorded by the child.
The recording is on
100% of the time,
but you're only
on 5% of the time
regarding your consciousness.
>>LISA: So to break that
pattern, you have to willfully
and intentionally and
mindfully break the pattern.
>>LIPTON: That's called
being a conscious parent.
>>LISA: Hm.
>>LIPTON: And that's
the whole idea
is because if you know your
child's patterning you,
then what you have to do
is live the life that you
want your child to live.
>>LISA: So in terms of
genetics, if you want to break
the genetic, I guess,
pattern of obesity--
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: You would have to
willfully and consciously make
choices for the right types
of food and the right type
of exercise and
to really shift--
>>LIPTON: --to
recognize that what
your engagement in
the environment is,
is controlling your biology.
If you put garbage in, you
get garbage back out again.
But there is no
gene for obesity.
That's a behavioral consequence.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>LIPTON: See?
And it's the idea was how
do I sublimate my anxiety?
And, well, how did
your family do it?
>>LISA: So most of the
genetic expressions
are a reaction to
our environment.
>>LIPTON: 5% of the
defects in genetics
are due to the birth defects.
95% are acquired defects--
>>LISA: --are learned behaviors.
>>LIPTON: --learned
from our experiences.
>>LISA: So anxiety?
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
>>LISA: Learned behavior.
>>LIPTON: How did your parents
deal with their anxiety?
Did they fret?
Did they get
anxious and nervous?
Then you would do the same.
>>LISA: Is anxiety genetic?
>>LIPTON: No, it's learned.
>>LISA: Really?
>>LIPTON: Yes, it's learned.
Anxiety means I'm not
dealing with the environment
appropriately or effectively
to create what I want.
>>LISA: So, well, wait.
If a father had anxiety as a
child, and then the child--
he has a child, and
that child has anxiety
but never knew the father with
the anxiety at that level,
how does that work?
>>LIPTON: The anxiety
was programmed in there
in the first six years
of the child's life--
>>LISA: --in some way.
>>LIPTON: --just by
observing the parent.
So let's give a critical piece
of data that, if you see it,
then it's like, oh!
It goes like this.
A child adopted into a family
that has a lineage of cancer
will get the same family cancer
with the same propensity as any
of the natural genetic
siblings, yet the child
comes from totally
different genetics.
And what's the point?
The point was, the cancer
didn't come from the genes.
The cancer came
from the inability--
>>LISA: --the environment.
>>LIPTON: --to live in harmony
with the world, to hold anger.
A lot of it is inability to
express anger or frustration.
This is what leads to chemistry
of causing the cells to engage
in inappropriate
genetic activity.
>>LISA: You actually have a
slide that shows an animation
of how this happens, right, how
the RNA comes in, and it splits
off, and the whole idea of it--
>>LIPTON:Well, basically,
when we look at a chromosome,
a chromosome is like my arm.
It has a core of DNA, my arm,
with a sleeve of protein.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: DNA is a blueprint.
And it says, if you
want to read a gene,
you need to read the gene.
Well, if I have a sleeve over
it, I can't read the gene.
So what it basically
shows is this.
A signal from the environment--
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: --causes the
protein to change shape.
That's what we talked about.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And when the
protein changes shape,
the proteins come
off the chromosome.
The DNA is now exposed.
Once the DNA is exposed, the
cell makes a copy of the DNA,
and that's called RNA.
And that's the
blueprint used to make
the building blocks of the body.
Once I have the RNA,
I don't need the DNA.
So the signal detaches,
and the gene is covered up.
So when I say, the
gene was activated,
I say, what did the gene do?
And if you look
at the animation,
the gene didn't do anything.
It's a blueprint.
It's being, like, Xerox
copied by this protein.
And the Xerox is called RNA,
and that's the blueprint
that you work with.
But the gene itself
didn't do anything.
So basically, that's
one part of epigenetics,
selecting the genes
and doing that.
But the second
part of epigenetics
is a little different.
And the second part of
epigenetics is this.
Is that not only can
you select the gene,
but the environmental
information,
as translated by the
chemistry from the brain,
can modify the
readout of the gene.
It doesn't change
the genetic code.
But it's like scissors and tape.
Take a gene blueprint,
cut it up in pieces,
and retape it in a
different sequence.
It's the same gene, but now it's
reading a different program.
And this is how a normal,
healthy gene can lead to cancer
by the chemistry in the body
that's going to adapt that gene
to compensate or complement
the environment that we're in.
>>LISA: So stress can be
perceived two different ways,
right?
You can have stress
in your life.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: But if you perceive
it as devastating stress,
it will cause that exact thing.
It will cause degeneration.
>>LIPTON: Right.
Because once you perceive it
and interpret this as stress,
then the nature of the system
is to release stress hormones.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: Well,
the stress hormones
are the ones that activate
or inhibit the genes
and change the genes
and do all this.
So it's basically,
this is why stress
is the cause of most illness.
As I said, 95% of us got here
with a perfectly adequate set
of genes for a
healthy, happy life.
>>LISA: Yet 90% percent of
disease is caused by stress.
>>LIPTON: And that's
exactly what it's all about.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>LIPTON: And stress is
just your interpretation.
>>LISA: Ah, interesting.
>>LIPTON: So the concept of
all of these new age things
are actually founded in
the science of saying what?
Meditation, eat
better nutrition.
Why?
You are reducing the
environmental stress
on the system and
allowing the system
to work in its normal
harmony the way
it does to promote health.
>>LISA: You can basically
chunk this entire thing up
to the conversation
of our environment.
>>LIPTON: Well,
that's the whole idea.
It's just what I said.
Look, I put cells
in the petri dish.
The fate of the cells is
not based on the genetics
that I put in there.
It's based on the environment.
I change the environment.
A healthy environment, the
cells grow beautifully.
An unhealthy environment,
they get sick and die.
I mean, that's so simple.
And so basically it
says, yeah, but you
are the skin-covered petri dish.
And are you putting in good
chemistry in your culture
medium or bad chemistry?
Well, I say, what
are you thinking?
>>LISA: Ah.
>>LIPTON: That's what
it comes down to.
>>LISA: So this is really, truly
that the biggest impact that
Dr. Bruce Lipton has
made to our community,
is how our thoughts and the
perception of our environment--
not only environment,
but the perception,
how we perceive what
is going on around us--
directly impacts the growth
of healthy cells or the--
>>LIPTON: --expression--
>>LISA: --the degeneration
of unhealthy cells.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
And it's really very
important to recognize this.
Our perception or interpretation
of the environment
does not necessarily have
to match the environment.
You could live in a
perfectly healthy environment
but have a fear, and
the fear that something
is going to go wrong.
Well, it's not out there.
But the fear, itself--
Do the cells see the
thing that's out there?
No.
The cells see what
the brain thinks.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: So while you may
live in a perfectly healthy
environment, if
the brain perceives
that it's a negative
environment,
or you're under some stress,
or you're under some pressure,
the cells only see what the
brain interpreted, because it's
the brain's chemistry
that the cells read.
If the cells could--
Here's an interesting point.
I work with muscular dystrophy
patients, cloning their cells.
In the body, their muscle stem
cells didn't work very well,
and they had muscular dystrophy.
But when I took their stem
cells out of their body
and put it into a petri dish
with a good environment--
>>LISA: They worked?
>>LIPTON: They
worked beautifully,
and they grew well.
What was the issue was,
in a bad environment,
the cells weren't able
to compensate and be OK.
But take them out of
the bad environment,
and they were healthy.
So we've been blaming the cells.
>>LISA: The bad environment,
though, in that person's body,
would be a cascading effect
of chemicals in the body
that caused that then?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, and
activation of this.
Because remember,
epigenetics can
modify the readout of the genes.
It can take a normal, healthy
gene and make it cause cancer.
But as epigenetics research
also revealed-- revealed it,
very interesting, you can
start with a mutant gene.
And in the right
environment, the mutant gene
will read as a normal gene.
>>LISA: You see, the claim that
you're making here is huge.
I mean, basically,
are you saying
that you can reverse
muscular dystrophy?
>>LIPTON: That these
issues have been shown.
But the issue is, it's
based on the belief system.
So the idea is this.
I go in.
I'm a patient.
And what we learned as
children is very important.
Remember, our
programming as children
determine how we respond.
What did we learn as children?
Our health isn't in our hands.
Our health is in the hands
of the medical profession--
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: --number one.
Number two, we're
not professionals
about certain things,
and other people are.
So if I'm not a professional,
the professional opinion
becomes truth.
This is why it's
relevant, that it
says, if you get a diagnosis
that, like, you have a terminal
illness, and your
belief system is
the doctor is the
truth provider--
>>LISA: Hm.
>>LIPTON: --then whatever the
doctor said becomes your truth.
And that's why you can predict
when a patient's going to die,
because you
essentially tell them
when they were going
to die, you know?
>>LISA: Wow.
>>LIPTON: And all of this
has been demonstrated
through the concept
of placebo/nocebo.
A negative diagnosis
is, by definition,
a nocebo effect, yeah,
a negative belief.
I've already, you
know, mentioned it.
>>LISA: Many times, yeah.
>>LIPTON: But it's
a fact of science.
>>LISA: Um, hm.
>>LIPTON: A nocebo
belief can kill you.
It can cause all the
diseases that we have.
>>LISA: So we're really taught
that our healing is outside
of ourselves, that we're
powerless against our own
genetics, and that we don't have
an option in our own healing.
And what you're saying--
what the field of epigenetics
is saying, and you are so
wonderfully expressing today--
is that we can control the
expression of those genes.
We can turn them on and
off with the perceptions
of our environment.
>>LIPTON: This is an exact
fact, and it's an exact truth.
And why is this relevant?
Because it's time for us to
rewrite the negative beliefs
that come with our
own health issues.
Because if we
manifest an expression
from our negative
beliefs, then we're
going to manifest a negative
expression, and that's nocebo.
And yet, hey, the same person
could have a placebo belief,
and, all of a sudden,
it goes the other way.
>>LISA: So all of the Facebook
questions that are coming
in, saying I'm stressed out
at work, I'm uninspired,
all of that--
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: --is basically
reinforcing the negativity--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --and turning on those
genetic markers if they are
there, to--
>>LIPTON: You can feel
the stress in your body.
That's the chemistry.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
So I offer to those people, get
out of that state of stress.
Easier said than done?
There are so many
different things
that we've talked about on
"Gaiam Inspirations" that
offer outs--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --of ways of
thinking and studying
deeply about the human potential
movement in health and belief
systems and so forth.
That is-- that's proven science.
>>LIPTON: But, you
see, it's actually,
because it's been
on the outside,
we call it new age stuff.
But what was new age stuff?
It's all it was saying
is, learn to live
in harmony with the
world that you live in.
Whether it's a nutritional
thing or whether it's
a psychological thing,
the significance
is that it's that's what
causes the chemistry of health
or, in a negative sense,
the chemistry of disease.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
Basically, what you said
has wrapped up everything
we've ever talked about
on "Gaiam Inspirations"
and put it into the cellular
biological conversation.
Thank you so much, Dr. Bruce
Lipton, phenomenal contribution
that you have made to
the entire industry.
I appreciate it.
>>LIPTON: Lisa, thank you.
And I really want to
thank everyone out there,
because we're in an evolution
to make a better world.
>>LISA: Yes, we are.
This is all about
our own evolution.
Thank you, again.
And thank you so
much for being here.
If you would like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Dr. Bruce Lipton, we
go into a whole 90-minute
discussion and explain
this in great detail.
So you can watch that
by going to gaiamtv.com.
And you can sign up for a
free trial subscription there.
And you can share that with
your friends and so forth.
So just go and sign
up for gaiamtv.com.
Thank you so much.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]